[MUSIC]
I'm going to illustrate how to use
approximate dynamic programming and
reinforcement learning to solve
high dimensional problems.
This is something that arose in
the context of truckload trucking,
think of this as Uber or Lyft for
a truckload freight where a truck
moves an entire load of freight from
A to B from one city to the next.
Here we have to pick the best driver on
the left to assign to the best load on
the right.
We don't have to move all the loads and
I have to think about where the load's
going and
what might happen which is uncertain.
Let's imagine that we just
have one truck driver.
So this is the easier problem,
imagine that we're a new truck driver.
We're starting off in Texas and
somebody's come along and
showed us four loads of freight and
I have to pick the best one to move.
Each of the loads are going to different
destinations I've never been to before.
My estimate of the downstream value
of these destinations is zero
because I'm brand new.
Of these I'm going to
look at all of them and
say gee the load going
to New York is $450.
That looks best, I'll pick that one.
And before I move I'm going to update
the value being in Texas to $450 because
that's how much I made.
Because the 450 I'm going to add it
to the downstream value of zero.
Now, let's move to New York,
repeat the whole process all over again.
Now to go back to Texas I would add
the 125 to the 450 to get 575 but
there's a load going to California making
$600 so I'm going to take that one.
So now we do the value of New York is 600,
go to California.
Now I'm looking at various locations,
one load is $400 going to Minnesota, but
I've never been to Minnesota.
So my best estimate of that is zero
just because I never been there.
So we're going to come
back to that problem.
But for the moment the best load looks
like the one going to Texas because I'm
going to add the 350 to
the downstream 450 to get $800.
So we're going to go to Texas.
Now I'm in Texas,
once again I'm looking at various loads,
there's one going to Colorado.
I've never been to Colorado but it's $800.
The last time I was in Texas I made 450.
Let's go ahead and see, the old estimate
of the value of being in Texas is 450.
But now I've got this $800 load.
What I'm going to do is smooth these two,
I'm going to say use
a smoothing factor of 0.1,
a learning rate step size to some where
I'm going to take one minus the step size.
So I get a number of 0.9 times the old
estimate plus 0.1 times the new estimate
gives me an updated estimate of
the value being in Texas of 485.
So this is my updated estimate.
Now, this is classic approximate dynamic
programming reinforcement learning.
The oral community has many
variations of what I just showed you,
one of which would fix issues like gee why
didn't I go to Minnesota because maybe I
should have gone to Minnesota.
But this is also methods that
will only work on one truck.
What if I have a fleet of trucks and
I'm actually a trucking company.
So let's imagine I have a grid,
a five by five grid.
So there's 25 locations to go to and so
my truck can be in any one
of these 25 locations.
But if I'm a trucking company and
I have two trucks,
now my state is not what
location my one truck is in.
My state is the state of the fleet and
I have all these different combinations
of where to put two trucks.
And maybe I have six trucks and now I have
all these permutations and combinations.
In fact as I grow this the formula for
the number of states that my fleet
can be in is given by this formula.
And as I grow the fleet size
from one to five to 50 and
if I grow my number of states or
locations or attributes of the truck,
I can get this massively
large number of states.
So classical discrete state
representations best known in
reinforcement learning would simply
not work for a fleet of trucks.
So here I'm going to show you how
to extend to a fleet of trucks.
Let's imagine that I have a series
of set of drivers and loads and
I have to assign drivers to loads.
This is an assignment problem.
So here are my drivers and here are my
loads and over time drivers will enter and
leave the system,
new loads will be called in.
I have to make those assignments
in the future sequentially and
I need to think about those events that
are going to happen in the future to make
the best decision now.
So let's take one truck now where I
can look at two different loads and
each one has a downstream value.
I can take those downstream values,
add it to the contribution that I earned
from just making that
initial assignment to a load.
And now I just have a simple assignment
problem, if I grow that to an entire
fleet this would be a network problem,
some call it a linear program.
There's packages for this, Gurobi, CPLEX.
These are available in Python.
If you're in a university,
these are free and
you can solve very large problems very,
very quickly.
Now how I do those downstream values
because I know how to do the value of
a truck but how do I handle the fleet?
So here's what we're going to do.
We're going to go ahead and
solve our assignment problem.
We're going to assign three
drivers to three loads,
that fourth driver has nothing to do.
So he just stays and
each one has a downstream value.
Now, what I'm going to do is take
away the first driver for example, so
we're going to move it, re-solve.
Now I'm going to get the change in the
total contribution for the whole system.
That's the marginal value of that
one driver with attribute A1 and
we're going to call that
marginal value V hat.
And so this is the difference between
the total contribution of the whole system
with and without the driver.
Now we're going to do the smoothing just
like we did with one truck where we have
the attributes of our one driver.
We have the old smoothed estimate V bar,
the V hat is the updated marginal value
of the one driver and we get an updated
smoothed estimate of the marginal value.
Now I have to do this for
each driver, okay.
So the thing is I'll have
to loop over the drivers.
However, it is also the case that if
we can solve this as a linear program,
LP packages will give you this marginal
value, it's called a dual variable,
for free.
Other instances, you have to do these
numerical derivatives yourself, but
it's all quite scalable.
And at the end what we can do is have
these smoothed estimates V bars.
Now, the V bar is not
the value of a driver,
it's the marginal value of a driver.
But this is a linear program and
I can scale this to hundreds,
even thousands of drivers.
This is the overall algorithm.
The green is the linear program where
I have to call a solver to solve that,
X is a vector here,
the V hat is a vector as well.
The V hat is the marginal value
of each of these drivers.
The blue is where I update these
marginal values the V bars, and
the red is where I then
simulate forward in time.
So let's illustrate that simulation.
So the blue squares here is my problem
now with a value in the future.
I'm going to simulate my
way into the future and
I'm going to do this iteratively.
And over the iterations I'm going to get
better and better estimates of these
marginal values and the oval quality
solution tends to increase not uniformly,
you'll see some little hips and
skips there.
But generally if you've got defined
algorithm, this will move forward.
This has been a very brief introduction
to handling high-dimensional
resource allocation problems.
If you go to the website
jungle.Princeton.edu,
you'll get a lot more additional material,
just look under educational materials.
For hints of how to program this look for
the Python modules on my GitHub directory
and look for the blood management problem,
and you'll see a nice illustration.